Hi, welcome to session 122,
Optimizing Core Data Applications,
or more specifically,
Optimizing Your Core Data Applications,
because really those are the
only ones you care about.
Checklist basically of things
that you should look for,
look at when you're looking into
optimizing your application.
First of which is it's awfully hard
to optimize a Core Data application if
you don't have a Core Data application.
Last year when we introduced Core Data,
we had a fixed set of
file formats supported,
the XML, binary, in-memory,
and SQLite stores.
And a lot of you made it very,
very clear that you wanted to use
Core Data with your own file formats,
that you had legacy file formats
that you'd been shipping,
that your customers were using,
that were in wide distribution,
and gosh darn it,
you wanted Core Data to work with those.
You asked, we obeyed,
we now have an Atomic Store API that you
can use to put your own file formats in.
under Core Data.
Basically, your data in our world.
Much like the XML and binary stores,
and much like the name would hint,
files are read and written atomically.
This means that all of your
application data comes into
Core Data when the store is added,
and all of it is written
when the store is saved.
There's two classes involved,
NSAtomicStore and NSAtomicStoreCacheNode.
And this is sort of how they work.
can see that we've got a persistent
store coordinator and we've got a file.
As many of you, all of you know,
persistent store coordinators,
the center of the Core Data world,
that's really your first
entry point for stores.
User decides they want to open a
file containing your legacy data.
They tell the persistent store
coordinator to add a store.
Persistent store coordinator looks
in its dictionary of store types
to find out what clash should be
instantiated to handle that store
data and creates an instance.
It then sends a load method,
which is the atomic
store's queue to go off,
look at the store file,
find each managed object's external
representation in that file,
and create a cache node.
Does this for all of the data in the
file and then calls add cache nodes,
which causes those cache nodes to
be registered in the atomic store.
Load returns,
add persistent store with type
on the coordinator returns.
And you've got a fully
configured Core Data stack.
Just like any of the other store types,
Core Data can now query, edit, save,
delete, update,
do whatever they'd like with the user
data in the managed object context,
living on top of your store format.
Once the user's done with whatever
it is they were planning on
doing-- adding new objects,
deleting objects, updating data--
They're going to call
save on the context.
They're going to hit a save button.
You're going to call save on the context.
That's going to get sent down to
the persistent store coordinator.
And then interesting
things start to happen.
First off, for every newly inserted
managed object in the context,
new reference object for managed
object is going to be called.
This is your cue to create some form of
a persistent object identifier that can
be used to uniquely identify that managed
object within its inheritance hierarchy.
Once we've done this,
we switch in the data you've
created into the persistent,
into the managed object IDs,
thus assigning persistent
object IDs to all of those
objects that were just created.
Once we've done that,
we call new cache node for managed object
for all of these newly inserted objects.
This is your cue to go off
and create a cache node,
much like the ones you created
in the load phase earlier,
an external representation
of your managed objects.
Once we've handled all of
the newly inserted objects,
we start calling updateCacheNode
for managed objects with all of
the cached nodes that have been,
or with all of the managed objects
that have been edited in the context.
This method should go through,
take all of the attribute values
out of the edited managed object
and push those into the cache node.
Once we've done that for
all of the updated objects,
we send a willRemoveCacheNodes method to
the atomic store telling it what store,
what cached, what managed objects have
been marked for deletion.
Finally, we call save,
which is your cue to find whatever set
of cache nodes exists in the atomic
store and write those out to file.
That's pretty much it.
That's all there is to it.
We provide, as I said,
two classes to help you do this.
An Atomic Store,
which is an abstract class,
provides all of the mechanisms
necessary for Core Data to
interact with your external data.
It does, however,
require that you provide
the translation layer,
since we have no clue what it is you
want your external data to look like.
And it also requires that
you handle the metadata,
that you somehow take care of saving
the store's unique identifier and
any of the versioning information.
You have to-- in order to
implement an atomic store,
you need to override five methods.
Don't worry, if you miss one,
we'll throw an exception and let
you know that something really
important somewhere got missed.
Those five methods are load,
we already explained that,
new reference object for managed object,
new cache node for managed object,
update cache node from managed object,
and save.
Those are the only five methods you
really need to concern yourself with.
I've mentioned cache nodes.
What are they?
They're an intermediary representation
that lives between whatever's living
in the file format and managed objects.
Why do we have them?
Why don't we just use managed objects?
Because managed objects have to exist
inside a managed object context.
They can only be used by
that managed object context,
they're tracked by that
managed object context.
A persistent stack can have
multiple managed object contexts,
so there's a question of, you know,
where would we put those?
So instead of trying to invert our
stack and put things under that should
be over and all that kind of fun stuff,
we have this intermediate representation,
one per managed object that is going
to be stored in the external store,
The only requirement on a cache
node is that it be KVC compliant.
It needs to return wrapped
values for the attributes.
It needs to return
collections of cache nodes,
related cache nodes for relationships.
This is also true of 2-1 relationships.
If you have a 2-1 relationship,
you need to return a collection
containing one element.
We provide a concrete class that
allows you to wrap a dictionary.
You provide, you instantiate,
you alloc and edit and
then hand it a dictionary,
at which point everything just works.
You're free to override it if you'd like.
All you need to do is make
sure it remains KVC compliant.
So just to prove that, you know,
we're not just talking,
that we can actually do this,
I have a demo.
This is actually, I believe,
associated with this
session on the ADC website.
So you can go off and
find the code for this.
But it's a simple HTML star.
I'm just going to build it and run it.
I've got a little application.
It lets me enter user information,
pick on one of my coworkers,
whose goal is pretty much take
over the world with bindings.
He also wrote this demo application,
so I figure he deserves some credit here.
Add another user.
If I can remember not to hit
the middle button on the mouse.
another one of my coworkers,
whose goal is to make sure everybody
in the world unit tests everything.
and a lot of coworkers
with grandiose plans.
So I've saved it.
Now if I go off and look--
applications,
library application support.
We have something called HTML store.
It's storing something that
looks awfully like an HTML file.
And voila, here's the information
I entered in my application.
But wait, you say,
that might just be dummy data.
Wouldn't be the first time in a demo.
So we've got this image well over here.
So I'm going to go off and
I've got some pictures.
That's where I want to be.
That's actually a pretty good
picture for all of my coworkers since
FOOS is really big on our floor.
Save it.
Reload this file.
And voila, we've added an image.
It's a pretty simple store format.
Every entity has its own table.
Attributes are stored
in individual columns.
If you've got relationships,
they're stored as hyperlinks
in a final column.
I could add more and more
stuff to show it off,
but you get the basic point here.
We have an HTML store.
We've shipped the source code for it.
Like I said, you can go off and get
it from the ADC website.
And really, this is the meat of it.
One class, HTML store,
has an init method, has a dialog method,
returns its identifier because we
wanted to do fancy things there.
goes off and calls helper
functions for load,
but most of those are
concerned with parsing HTML.
Save.
New Cache Node, Update Cache Node.
and New Reference Object for
Managed Object ID.
And we catch this method
that's being overridden.
We don't really need to,
but it's convenient.
All of that in about 200 lines of code.
Your very own store.
So you can do this too.
You can go off, write your own store.
Some things to think about.
Because these are atomic stores,
everything's going to get read up front.
You might want to consider deferring some
of the work of doing that loading if you
know that you've got a lot of objects.
You only ever need to
deal with a tiny subset.
It's expensive to parse stuff.
You're pulling stuff in.
That's expensive enough.
You might not want to add the
additional load of all the parsing,
so you can defer loading and
wrapping values until you actually
try and access those objects.
But you say you really want
to be living in Core Data,
you want to be using an SQL store.
It still might be interesting for you to
write an atomic store simply as a way to
migrate your legacy data into Core Data.
It's probably going to be easier for
you to write an atomic store that
can interpret your file formats.
Use those to load your data and then
call migrate on the persistent store
coordinator and have it translate
all of the data into one of the more
standard formats like say the SQL format.
It can also give you interoperability
with other standards.
You can load data from a Core Data file
and save it through a legacy file
atomic store that will give you
some kind of format that some other
application you use might need.
But like all atomic stores,
they're a little bit problematic with
large data sets simply because you
have to load everything up front,
save everything all at once.
There's a cycles performance
impact there and there's also
a memory space issue because,
well, if you got a significantly
large data set,
you're going to be using a lot of memory.
So now you're in Core Data and we
can start doing interesting things.
things.
First thing to do if you want to
make your Core Data application
fast is pick the proper store.
We've got a number of store types,
each of which has their
own characteristics,
depending on what you want to do.
We have an in-memory store which
allows you to create objects
that are only useful for the
duration of that application.
But boy,
is it blazingly fast when you save.
We've got our atomic stores.
Their big benefit is
they're very easy to use.
They don't require that you
learn anything about SQL.
They're fairly fast for small data sets.
And in the case of the XML store,
at least, it's human readable,
so it makes it easier for you to debug.
There's your atomic store class,
which may or may not be human
readable depending on what you've
decided to use as a format.
And definitely,
and this is the only store
where you can get it,
contains whatever requirements
are important to you.
We can't know, but you can when you
build your store file.
And then there's the SQL Lite store,
which is honestly the most
scalable of our stores.
It's best at dealing
with large data sets.
It's more efficient both
in memory and on disk.
Why?
Because it doesn't need all the
extra overhead that goes into
archiving or creating an XML file.
It's faster loading because you
only load the objects you need.
There's no upfront overhead when
you add an SQL light store because,
well, until you ask it for objects,
we don't try and load any.
You're going to have faster searching.
SQL stores are generally
designed for doing things like
relational queries and searching.
It is, however, less forgiving,
and this is where we really get
into the meat of optimization,
if you've got a bad model.
Optimizing your model is really
the place to start when you want
to make Core Data application fast.
Because no matter what you do,
if you've got a model that really
doesn't work for your applications data,
there's just nothing you
can do to make it fast.
You need to design your model
around your applications data,
but to a certain extent,
you also need to consider designing your
application around the data you've got.
One of the things you really don't
want to do is build the kitchen
sink window where you try and
display everything all at once.
That means you're going to have
to load all of your data up front.
That's slow, that's painful.
It's probably also going to be really
confusing to your user who's going
to be stuck sorting through all kinds
of stuff that doesn't necessarily
need to be seen at the same time.
So how do you design a
data model for efficiency?
This is a pattern we see a lot.
People just throw
everything onto one entity.
Here we have a recipes entity
that seems to be our theme.
Recipes, we like to cook.
If we look at this entity,
it's actually easier often to try
and optimize if you actually put
some data into a table representing
what you would actually create if
you created instances of that entity.
So I've done that,
and I'm looking at my table.
The first thing I see is this column.
That looks suspiciously
like a flattened array,
an array of strings actually.
That's really kind of inconvenient and
you really don't want to do that because,
well, Core Data and a lot of other things
get much happier if they just have
NSValue type attributes to work on.
So we're going to break those
out into their own table.
Call it normalization.
Move it off.
We've now got an ingredients entity.
Contains all of the ingredients
that were in that column in the
original table and their quantities.
One of the advantages to this
is it's now a lot easier to
search for recipes by ingredient.
Now, if I'm doing normalization,
the first thing I need to do is put
some kind of a foreign key on this
table so I can link it back to the
recipe the ingredient came from.
You'll notice that just using the
recipe name is going to be kind
of inconvenient because I've got
multiple recipes with the same name.
So I would decide, now,
you'll probably want to use
just numerical ID and put that
back on the recipes table.
And you know what?
This is Core Data.
Forget all of that.
You don't need to know about it
except insofar as you know that
this is how normalization works.
There's something like that
going on behind the scenes.
Core Data takes care
of all of it for you.
So we're rid of the ingredients column.
What can we do next?
Well, for those of you who are
familiar with Objective-C,
you've probably zoomed in on
this column because that looks
an awful lot like an NSData.
And given that the title
of the column is Pitcher,
you'd be right.
That's a picture of the recipe.
What do we know about image data?
We know it's big.
We know given this data,
given the entity we saw earlier,
given this data,
we know that we're going to load that
large chunk of data even if all we
want to do is display recipe names
in a table view or an outline view.
We're going to move that off onto
its own separate entity as well.
We've just speeded up our load time a
lot if we don't have to pull 5 megabytes
worth of image data in for every recipe
we want to display in our table view.
So what can we do next?
Here's a good place to start.
If you're doing normalization,
one of the things you're
always thinking is,
I want to reduce, as much as I can,
duplicate data in my tables.
There's some duplicate data.
This is actually kind of a deceiving
example because in the interest of
getting everything into Keynote,
I made the table small.
The chef would probably be
split across several columns,
first name and last name,
possibly some biography information.
It's going to be entered in
every single row in the table.
It means what?
I have to load it every time.
It bloats my database because I've
got all of this data that's repeated
over and over and over again.
And if for some reason I ever
have to change one element,
Ben gets sick and tired of being a
T in the alphabet and decides that no,
he wants to be a Ferlet too.
I'm going to have to go change
how many rows in my database?
It's much easier if I just
stick that all in its own table.
Have one entry per chef,
have those related.
Similarly,
we've got a cuisine going here.
Italian Cuisine x2.
Do I really need that x2 or x10 or x1000
once for every recipe in the database?
Nope.
Let's make that go away too.
And since we're on a roll,
we'll look at the recipe names and, hey,
wow,
we've got duplicate data in there too.
This is where you sort of
have to stop and think,
what does that duplication mean?
In the case of a chef or
in the case of cuisine,
duplicate data really is, in a way,
identical.
It's actually referring to
the same thing in all places.
Is a recipe name unique in the same way?
Or if I change a recipe name,
it just changes that one recipe.
It doesn't change all
recipes with that name.
These recipe names are pretty
integral to the identity of a recipe,
so we're going to leave
those in this table.
We're going to call it done because
pretty much everything we've got left
really is integral to this table.
So we had this and we've
made it look like that.
It's more complex, but odds are very good
it's going to be faster.
Recipes are going to load faster,
querying by cuisine
is going to be faster,
querying by chef is going to be faster.
And hey,
we've added the ability to easily
query by ingredients as well.
But you know, normalization isn't always
what you want to do.
Sometimes you actually
want to go the other way.
Take, for example, iCal.
You might have heard in session yesterday
that they've started using Core Data,
which means we actually had to think
about their model a little bit,
just ourselves, make sure they weren't
doing anything wrong.
You'll notice they've got these badges.
They display primarily events,
but the events have information about
things that are related to the events.
If I was making a first
pass at their model,
I'd build something that
looks a lot like this.
I have a base event.
It has relationships off to people,
alarms, and notes.
But you know, that's really expensive
when I start doing their UI,
because in order to display
any of those badges,
I have to fault in all
of these relationships.
And that's a lot of extra work.
What I'd probably want to do instead
is create a Boolean that contains
metadata about the relationships
and put that on the base entity.
Then I can put up my badges or not,
depending on what the
Boolean value is set to.
This is going to require that
you write a little bit more code.
You're going to have to actually add
accessor methods and put code in those
accessor methods to update the Booleans
as the relationships are updated.
But it's going to be faster.
So what are the design tips we
can give you to go away with?
If you can break entities down,
put subsidiary attributes onto entities
at the other end of relationships in
order to speed uploading of your base
entities for display and table views,
outline views,
or something that really wants
a smaller subset of the data,
do it.
Move NSData onto the other
end of 2.1 relationships.
It's almost always the right thing to do.
Consider relationships carefully.
They're very useful.
They speed up searching.
They allow you to minimize the
amount of duplicate data you've got,
which makes updates faster,
makes your database smaller,
makes your data set smaller,
because you don't have that data
in memory in multiple places.
They do take a little
bit of time to update.
And they're a little bit slower
if you're doing key path queries
across a lot of relationships.
But it's probably also
going to be faster,
like I said,
to do a strict equality check when you're
querying then to do string
comparisons across a table.
You also want to consider
inheritance carefully.
There's not a lot of cost to inheritance,
but if you've got a very large data set,
Those costs can build up over time.
So I've told you to change your model.
And I know at least some
of you are thinking,
but you know,
it's a pain to migrate data.
Or at least it was in
the Tiger timeframe.
We've tried to help solve that problem
as well by adding a mechanism for
model migration that conveniently
helps you optimize because you don't
need to worry about the pain of writing
migration code every time you decide
to change your model to make it faster.
Core Data provides support for
model versioning and for migration.
We put version information
in the store metadata,
and we provide the ability to
create mapping models that allow
you to describe transformations
from one Core Data version
to another Core Data version.
If you want to see how this works,
you can go look at the
NS Migration Manager,
NS Mapping Model,
NS Store Migration Policy,
and a bunch of other classes that
Malcolm has kindly documented for you.
Out of the box, what you need to know is
we provide facilities for
adding and removing entities,
adding and removing properties,
for factoring properties
into separate entities at the
end of to-one relationships,
absorbing entities that were
on to-one relationships,
and changing relationship cardinality,
making it to-one and
to-many or vice versa,
as long as it was only one
object and then to-many.
Unfortunately, a lot of optimization is
a little bit more complex,
and you're probably going
to have to write code.
If you're uniting objects,
which you would do to improve query
speed and to minimize the amount of data
you've got in the database or in memory,
you're probably going to have to write
a custom entity migration policy.
If you want to do data duplication,
we'll get more into that later when
we're talking about database queries,
you might want to consider doing
some text canonicalization up front.
And for that,
you're probably going to want to
write a custom function expression.
That's really all I'm going to say
about migration other than it's there.
It's very useful in the context
of optimizing your data model.
And Malcolm has written really
great... great documentation about it.
So hopefully by now you've
got a reasonably optimized
model in your application.
You can start getting down
to the nitty gritties.
How do you get data into
your application quickly?
Well, there's a number of ways.
The fetch request cycle is pretty basic.
The user does something which causes
a fetch request to be created and
execute fetch requests to be called
on the managed object context.
That's sent down to the persistent store,
which sends it down to any
persistent store coordinate,
which sends it down to any of the stores.
It's an atomic store.
The predicate is evaluated
on the cache nodes in memory.
Otherwise, if it's an SQL store,
we create an SQL statement,
send that out to the database
where it's evaluated,
and we see if we can
find any matching data.
If we find matching data,
it's brought in, registered.
Managed objects are created or
found depending on whether you'd
already loaded the managed object,
passed back to the coordinator,
passed back to the context,
which registers them if it
doesn't already know about them,
and returned to the user.
It's a pretty basic process.
Many of you are probably
familiar with it.
You've read our document.
We've done a lot of documentation.
This isn't always what you want, though.
This is really good for the basic,
small data set, moderate data set,
even the largest data set user case.
But really,
it's not always what you want because
sometimes you don't need all of the
data that ends up getting loaded.
For example, a lot of the time,
you're only actually going to
want to know how many objects in
the database meet the criteria
that were set in the predicate.
With the existing API,
you'd actually have to fetch all
of those objects into memory,
count the number of them that
were in the result array.
You don't need to do that.
We don't need to do that anymore.
We've added API to the
managed object context,
count for fetch request,
which allows you to just
get the number back.
We've also added some
stuff to NSFetchRequest.
If you're doing a fetch on
an inheritance hierarchy,
you often don't want all of
the entities in that hierarchy.
You may want just one specific entity.
You can tell the fetch request to include
or exclude subentities to determine
precisely which objects you want back.
If all you want back
is a managed object ID,
you're interested in the
identity of the object.
Not any other information about them.
You can tell the fetch request to
return the result as managed object
IDs instead of creating faults.
Related to that is whether or
not you actually want to fetch
the attribute values from the
database when you do the fetch.
Normally, we fetch all of the values
for the object back,
register it in the row cache,
and return a fault.
When you trip the fault,
we go to the row cache,
populate the managed object,
and you now have attribute
values you can work with.
Sometimes that's not what you want.
You may have a very large data set
coming back for which you still want
faults because you're going to need
to treat them as managed objects
to access their attribute values.
But you may not need all of that data.
You may have 100,000 objects
that you're trying to bring back,
and you're only ever going to display 10,
20, 30.
At that point,
it may make more sense to leave
the attribute values in the
database until you actually
trip the managed object fault,
and then make the round trip to
the database to pull in just the
specific attributes you actually need.
An extension of that,
or actually not an extension,
sort of the other extreme is that you
know up front that you're going to
want all of the attribute information
from those managed objects pretty much
immediately after you do the fetch.
At this point,
you can tell the fetch request that it
should not return the objects as faults.
In that case,
we'll go out to the database,
pull all the attribute values back,
and create your managed object faults,
and then populate them immediately.
This saves you the trip through the
fault handlers if you know up front
that you're actually going to need
all of those managed objects realized.
Related to that is the ability to set
relationship key paths for prefetching.
What does this do?
Sometimes you know when
you load an object,
you're always going to
want some related object.
For my recipes,
I may know that because of
the way I'm displaying data,
not only do I always want the recipe,
I'm always going to immediately,
whenever I use a recipe,
try and access its cuisine.
I can specify the relationship key path.
This will tell Core Data that whenever
you fetch recipes from the database,
also fetch back their associated
cuisines and register those.
This can minimize the number of trips
you have to make to the database,
minimize the amount of work you have
to do after every trip to the database.
and it will make handling faulting
relationships a lot faster.
So there's no one silver bullet.
No one of these things is going to be
right for all of your applications.
You're going to have to decide how it
is your user is trying to use data,
what it is you're trying to achieve,
and which set of flags it is
that's appropriate for you.
Once you've got your data,
there's a couple other things
you really want to think about,
mostly having to do with how much of it
you want to keep in memory at one time.
We ended up like this at the end
of the last fetch request cycle.
We just had a couple objects in memory.
But you know, your user's not just going
to look at two objects.
They're going to ask for more and more.
And eventually,
you're going to have lots.
At some point, if they've only looked
at those objects once,
you're probably going
to want to release them.
So first,
you only want to fetch what you need,
but second is you only want
to retain what you need.
And some things that can help you
figure out what it is you're retaining,
whether you knew it or not,
is that contexts retain objects
that have been modified,
but not objects that
haven't been modified.
So if you're not retaining
something that hasn't been modified,
it's not being retained.
When its release count goes to zero,
it's released, deallocated,
memory gets scavenged,
you get to reuse it at some point.
Often it will surprise you if
you've got a wild pointer and other
things end up in the same place.
Weirdness happens when
you're trying to debug.
Heisenbugs aren't fun.
Undo managers retain object IDs only.
There's something to think about.
And you know,
we're subject to the rules of
Cocoa Memory Management just
the way you are.
So if you've tripped
a relationship fault,
relationships retain the
objects they're related to.
This is called, in the vernacular,
a retain cycle.
If you want for some of
those objects to go away,
you're going to need to figure out
how to break that retain cycle.
There's a couple of ways to do that.
The one you're probably going
to want to use most of all is
refresh object merge changes.
This is on the managed object context,
and it causes the object to
be turned back into a fault.
And if you say merge changes no,
the object remains a fault.
If you say merge changes yes,
it will be re-realized,
and the changes will be applied,
but the relationship
faults won't be tripped.
This allows you to break
relationships between objects,
break retain cycles,
and allow whatever is at the other
end of those relationships to be,
well, released, dealloced, scavenged.
There is another option,
which is much more of
a nuke and pave option,
which is reset.
You can call that on the managed object
context to blow away everything that's
been done in that context and reset
the state to the way it was initially.
This includes blowing
away the undo stack,
so it's a pretty heavyweight option.
But sometimes it's really what
you're going to want to do,
and it's going to be a lot
faster than refreshing every
single object in the context.
Things start to get tricky at this point.
A lot of optimization really is.
It becomes more a matter of
looking at what you've got,
trying to figure out
what it's telling you,
and then trying to figure
out what to do about it.
How do you do that in Core Data?
We've added a default,
com apple core data SQL debug.
This allows you to tell
Core Data to log all of its
transactions with the database.
You can set it to a
value between 1 and 3.
1 displays the least information,
3 is the most.
1 is probably actually for most of
you going to be the most useful.
It'll log all of the SQL that's
being sent to the database.
It'll tell you how many objects were
returned as a result of that SQL,
and it'll tell you how long it took.
If you find that's not
enough for some reason,
there's always Shark,
which will tell you exactly where
your application is spending cycles,
and where you really want
to be concentrating the bulk
of your optimization work.
What kind of things might you see
in the logs that Core Data prints
when it goes to the database?
You might see that you're
doing one big fetch up front,
and then a lot of individual
fetches that are on related objects
that are only after one object,
that are only returning one object.
What this means is that you're
probably firing a lot of
relationship faults individually.
This is a good place for you to use
relationship keypath prefetching.
Go grab those objects up front
instead of doing it one at a time.
This is a specialized subset of
what we call a bad access pattern
of repeated trips to the database.
Going to the database is I/O.
We all know that I/O is slower
than operating on stuff in memory.
You don't want to do it repeatedly
for very small object sets.
You want to try and maximize the
amount of data you get for the
overhead of the trip to the database.
Try and load as much as you can.
If you see you're bringing back
lots of individual objects,
try and find out if there's a
way to aggregate that somehow.
In operators are a very
good way to do this.
You can use the in operator to return.
You can write a predicate that basically
says my object ID in a random collection
of object IDs that you get somehow.
This will bring a whole bunch of
otherwise unrelated objects back
into memory all at the same time.
Sometimes you'll find out you're
loading more data than you need,
that the predicate you thought you
were setting isn't actually being set.
or you're not setting a
specific enough predicate.
Something else to look at.
Sometimes you'll notice that you're not
actually doing a lot of database queries,
but boy, are you spending a lot
of time in the database.
At this point,
you want to look at your where
clause and see what it says.
If you've got a complex predicate,
it might just be that you're
doing things in the wrong order.
You want to order the simple parts first.
If you have a salary comparison
and then some kind of a regex,
you want to do the numerical
salary comparison first.
you can cut down the number of rows
you actually have to do a regex on.
Well, text.
That's our last bullet point up there.
Red desk is expensive.
There's just no way around it.
It's a whole bunch of stuff that we have
to do to set that up to make it work.
The more flexibility you give
your user in querying text,
the more expensive your
query is going to be.
Basically, case and diacritic sensitive
comparisons are faster than case and
diacritic insensitive comparisons.
Equality is faster than
substring comparison,
is faster than regex.
You may notice that you're doing
case and diacritic insensitive regex.
You might want to ask yourself,
is that really what you need?
Do you really need the case
and diacritic insensitivity,
or are all of your users
Americans and wouldn't know an
accent if one snuck up on them?
Do you really need full regex or
is substring support good enough?
A lot of the time,
substrings are actually what
you really want to be using.
If you know that you really do need
case and diacritic insensitivity,
you might actually want to
think about doing some string
canonicalization up front,
creating a shadow attribute that contains
a canonicalized version of whatever
the text is that you want to search on.
This is going to make it a little bit
more expensive to create your objects,
a little bit more expensive to save them.
But boy, is it going to save you
time when you're searching.
Because every time you do a case
or diacritic insensitive search,
we have to normalize the text.
And when we're done with the search,
we just throw that away.
Well, you can imagine that that would
build up if you're doing 30
queries across the same column,
all of which have to do a whole
bunch of work and then throw it away.
All of which are doing the same whole
bunch of work and then throwing it away.
You might want to consider
uploading that up front.
Relationships are something that
can also be really expensive.
They can be very useful if
you're just following one link.
You're following a different
relationship key path,
and you're doing an
identity-based comparison.
It gets a lot uglier if you're following
13 of them and doing some kind of
obscure text manipulation at each step.
You want to try and minimize the
set of objects you're working with.
So you might want to see if there's
a way you can refactor your UI or
your data set to move some of that
Relationship information onto
other objects and not do large
amounts of key path following.
Some other stuff we've seen.
This is actually a fairly common
pattern if people are creating lots
and lots of objects all at once.
They'll hit the database
repeatedly to find out if they've
already created an object.
This is common if they want to use some
kind of unique information that is not,
however,
unique in the data set they started with.
Cuisines are actually a good example.
When I write my code to create
new recipes that have cuisines,
I can look at the cuisine field,
pull out that string value,
and do a database query to find
out whether or not I've already
created a cuisine with that name.
This is going to be slow.
What you're probably going to want
to do is take the cuisine name,
create a cuisine,
and then register it in a local cache
dictionary that I can use to find out
if I've already created that object.
Avoid the database trip.
Everybody's happier.
Don't save after every insert.
We've also seen this.
Try and batch them.
Do your inserts in lots of 100 or
1,000 or whatever makes sense for you.
One of the reasons people were doing
a lot of saves after inserts was
so they could get permanent object
IDs assigned as quickly as possible.
We've added API to the managed object
context that allows you to have
and I'm going to show you how to use
Core Data to manage large amounts of
data efficiently while maintaining
peak application performance.
Deletions.
As I mentioned before,
relationships are one of
those mixed blessings.
If an object participates in a
relationship that has an inverse,
in order to delete the object,
we have to fault in all the objects
that are on the other end of that
relationship so we can tell them
that their relationship to this
source object needs to be cleaned up.
Well, if you know up front that you're
deleting all objects that are at
the other end of that relationship,
you may want to nil out
the relationship first.
This will save Core Data a whole
bunch of work doing the delete
propagation for stuff that,
well, is going to be going away anyway.
If you don't want to do that,
but you know that there's a
whole bunch of objects at the
other end of the relationship,
rather than tripping
those faults one by one,
we mentioned that a few slides ago,
you might want to consider doing
some prefetching when you load
those objects in the first place.
Fetch whatever's on the other end
of the relationship so you're not
tripping those faults individually
one by one by one by whatever the
order of magnitude of work on the I.O.
there is.
And again, don't save after every delete.
So you've got all those
patterns and you're looking
at the numbers you're getting.
You're saying, "Does this make sense?
Can I do better?" A large part of
knowing whether or not you can do better,
whether or not it's
worth spending the time,
is knowing what to expect
in the first place.
Core Data performs really well.
for non-large data sets.
What's a large data set?
Unless your objects are 5 meg each,
5,000 objects is not a large data set.
A large data set,
depending on the size of your objects,
is going to start somewhere in the
hundreds of thousands of objects.
Core Data can load
moderately sized objects,
about 100,000 of them a second.
That's in the latest version of Tiger.
Ben will talk about some performance
improvements we've made in Leopard.
We can save about 5,000 objects a second.
We can delete about
1,000 objects a second.
If these are the numbers you're seeing,
you're probably doing about
as well as Core Data can do,
which means that you're at
the point where you've done
all you can in a simple case.
I'm going to bring Ben up here to
talk about the perils and patterns
of the more complicated case,
otherwise known as attempting
to multi-thread Core Data.
Hey, good afternoon, everyone.
So I'm going to show you some
stuff about multithreading.
I'm going to preface this by
saying that it's a lot of work,
and I don't really recommend
you go down this path until
you really absolutely have to.
But everybody asks eventually.
So some of the motivations
for using threads,
probably the best reason to add threads
to an application is responsiveness,
where you have a long-running operation
and you don't want your users to
get the little spinning pizza.
And in this case,
a long-running operation is
maybe 200 milliseconds or so.
So threads can be a way to avoid
using a progress bar and do
something in the background and
get your application's UI back to
the user as quickly as possible.
And in Core Data, another way you can use
threads are to do batch saves.
So if you have a really
large block of saves,
that can take a little bit of time.
We know we have some more
performance work to do here,
but one way you can get a boost is
if you're saving unrelated changes,
you can break them up
into different groups.
different groups and you can get a
performance improvement that way.
So for Core Data's thread safety,
like much of Cocoa,
there isn't a whole lot of
intrinsic thread safety going on.
You need to do some locking.
And we need you to help us understand
the scope of a transaction,
what changes you want and don't want
to be controlled by that thread.
So we need you to do some locking
on the managed object context and
on the persistent store coordinator
to give us some scoping information.
The managed objects themselves are always
owned by their managed object context.
So whenever you're concerned about
the thread safety of managed object,
you need to take a look
at who owns its context.
Managed object IDs are immutable,
and they're always thread safe.
So here's our recommended approach when
you do decide to jump into this pool.
And that's basically a thread
creates a managed object context.
A thread can have many
managed object contexts.
But in particular,
the managed object context stays
exclusively under the control
of the thread that created it.
So only the creator thread ever sees it,
knows about it.
There's no violations of encapsulation.
Basically, the managed object context
is confined to that thread.
This is easier to do.
So there's a lot of interdependencies
that require synchronization.
So there's more concurrency.
So it basically requires that you
break things up a little bit more
and plan your application around
larger aggregate operations.
But you can get more
performance this way.
So in this scenario,
Core Data is actually automatically
going to do some of the locking for you.
So you don't have to explicitly
lock a context if you're never
sharing it with another thread,
in the same way that if you
have a mutable dictionary and
no other thread ever sees it,
then you don't have to lock it.
And Core Data,
the managed object context,
when it needs resources
from the persistent store
coordinator or from the database,
will handle all the locking for you.
So you don't have to worry about
whether or not the database
resources need extra synchronization.
You still need to lock the
persistent store coordinator
when you message it explicitly.
So if you're, say,
adding a new persistent store or
you're asking a persistent store
coordinator to take a URI and
give you back a managed object ID,
some stuff like that,
then you'll need to lock the core.
So you can lock the persistent
store coordinator if it's being
shared amongst multiple threads.
If you have a document-based application,
then you might not have to do
this because the persistent store
coordinator might also be confined
to a thread in a similar way.
And another reason why you might want
to lock the persistent store coordinator
is actually to get less concurrency.
So if you have a bunch of operations,
you want to do some fetches,
you want to do a couple saves,
and you want one context to own the
coordinator for a specific block
and not let anybody else interpose
some edits until you're done,
you can lock the coordinator.
that only one context has access to
the database for some amount of time.
And in Leopard,
we're now shipping a debug version
of the Core Data Framework.
And when you use the debug version
of the Core Data Framework,
we added some threading
debugging assertions.
So we basically keep track of additional
state about what you've locked and what
you haven't locked and which thread
has got its fingers on which objects.
And if you break any of our assumptions,
we'll throw an assertion failure
and we'll basically kill your app.
And if you're running in GDB,
this is really useful to get a backtrace
of all the things that you've locked.
So you set up the DLD image suffix,
and this turns on the debugging.
If you man DLD, you can get some more
information about this.
And when you've set up the
information correctly and
you've passed this user default,
com, apple, core data, threading debug,
and in this our threading
debug level one,
we'll log a little message
saying that we've enabled the
multi-threading assertions.
And then you can break on
the NS assert functions.
So if you're running a code,
you can break on the NS assert functions.
So there's a really big one.
I just look it up in the
foundation documentation
and then throw my GDB in it.
And you can see an example
of background threading,
sorry, an example of multi-threading,
where each thread has a
confined context and they don't
pass context between threads.
This is actually a ship done tiger.
It's in developer examples, core data,
background fetching.
And the threads pass the immutable
object IDs between each other.
And since they're immutable,
no synchronization is required.
So threads can talk to each other.
And so they can pass information
about the objects they're working
with without actually exposing their
private copies of those objects.
And it's an example of
threading for responsiveness.
The background fetching doesn't
actually make the fetching any faster.
But it does mean that when
you bring up the window,
the user doesn't wait for all
the fetching to complete before
the table view is rendered.
So there's also the hard way,
which we really try to
dissuade people from doing,
but some user scenarios
actually require it.
And that's when you want to pass a
managed object context between threads.
So you can't confine it to
the thread that created it.
You need to pass it off to another
thread at a later point in time.
And in this case,
you really have to lock and unlock the
context as you move them between threads,
and you want to basically
transfer ownership of who's using
that managed object context.
Managed objects, again,
I really need to iterate this.
Even if you do value for key,
you do an accessor method
on a managed object,
that thread needs to own the lock on
that object's managed object context.
And reading is not thread safe.
Managed objects are not immutable.
They're not NSDictionary's.
And one of the real concerns here is
the side effect on Core Data is caching.
So you might trigger a fault.
You might trigger a callback.
There are any number of
things that can go on.
So we don't consider reading to
be thread safe intrinsically.
You need to lock.
and here's some sort
of higher level notes.
Whenever you move any kind of
Cocoa object between threads,
you need to retain anything you lock.
So if you lock a managed object
context or you lock a persistent store
coordinator or you lock an NS lock,
you need to own or retain on that.
If that object gets deallocated
from underneath you while you're
depending on its synchronization,
you will be very unhappy.
And then objects that get
pushed across threads,
whether they're managed objects
or any other kind of Cocoa object,
need to be retained by the sending thread
and released by the receiving thread.
And that's the only way you can make
sure that the lifespan of that object
actually survives long enough for the
receiving thread to do something with it.
And then managed objects go
wherever their contexts go.
So again,
our threading assertions work for
doing things the hard way as well.
You bump up the threading
debug level to level three,
and that kind of lets
you run with scissors.
And it's basically the same.
You just break on the NS assertion
and handle failure and method.
And at that point,
you can do thread apply all and then BT,
and that will get you backtraced
for all the threads running.
And another note,
Core Data's undo facility is built on top
of foundation about the NSUndoManager.
We're just pushing our own
functions onto the undo stack,
so it's not really all that magical.
We're just observing all the changes
to your managed object context and
doing some aggregation on them.
What this means is the undo
manager is not thread safe.
And the groups by event facility in
particular cannot be thread safe.
There's no amount of locking that
will make groups by event run.
So it needs to be disabled
on any undo managers you're
using in background threads.
You can either turn off...
You can either set groups by event off,
or you can tell that context
that you don't need undo
management on a background thread.
In fact, many background threads don't
really need undo management.
If you're doing a batch save and
something happens and you want to undo,
you might just redo
that work and try again.
Or if you're fetching in the background,
you don't need undo for that.
So when you disable groups by event,
you can just manually
push and pop undo stack,
basically bracketing yourself,
and it's just the Foundation API.
And a final note on threading
is about detached threads.
Now, you can review some information
about POSIX threading to get the full
technical detail about detached threads.
But basically,
all NS threads are considered detached.
And what this means is detached
threads are optional workers.
The process is not required
to wait for them to finish.
So an application can quit even if
there's detached threads running
in the background doing work.
And if you want the application,
if you want the main thread,
you can quit.
But to remain active and not quit,
then you're required to do
some manual synchronization,
whether it's a condition signal or a
thread join or some other work there.
But basically, what this means is if you
save in the background,
the application could quit
before your save is done,
halfway through the save,
any point during the save.
Now, this isn't necessarily a
big deal for the database.
The SQLite database has got
full transactional support.
They're completely ACID compliant.
So the database will be fine,
but your users may not really
appreciate that you had a clean
document window and you quit,
and yet their changes aren't
actually saved to disk.
So you'll want to do some additional
synchronization if you go too far
into the threading using NS threads.
and here I'm going to switch over
to the demo machine now and do
sort of a modified reprise of some
of the demonstrations from last
night and show in particular,
yeah, I don't care about the HTML store,
and in particular show you some stuff in
Shark where you can see both how to use
Shark and how I would approach Shark and
look at the hotspots and what things
evolved between the different versions
of the application that we're working on.
So this is basically just fetching
500,000 words from a dictionary database
and I'm just warming it up so it's
sort of a fair comparison for everybody.
And so here in the first one,
this is a basic project that's
using SQLite directly and
And basically, it's written in Rossi.
It's using the SQLite APIs.
It's using Core Foundation to
do the collection management.
And the key point here is we
don't have a model object.
We just have a generic dictionary.
So this is pretty convenient
to use Core Foundation.
And we're running our own SQL.
Pretty easy.
We iterate through everything.
And that's pretty much it.
So in Shark, we will-- this one.
Take just a second here to run.
Shark runs quite nicely
on a quad processor.
and I'm going to show you how to use
Core Data to manage large amounts of
data efficiently while maintaining
peak application performance.
Melissa Turner,
Ben Trumbull and I'm going to show
you how to use Core Data to manage
large amounts of data efficiently while
maintaining peak application performance.
So basically,
we can see here in the main function,
we're spending a lot of time releasing
values and a lot of time doing the set.
We spend a little bit of time in SQLite
and a lot of time wrapping values.
And with working in the database,
it's actually pretty typical
in pulling data to and from.
You have to really wrap the values to
put these things into a Cocoa View.
Let's see if I can
persuade Shark to-- eh.
Shark doesn't want to open my source.
How sad.
This is the penalty I get for
not building on this machine.
Basically, just walking you through it,
a lot of this dictionary work is
going on right in here as we pull
back each of the values using the
SQLite API to get each column value.
And we need to wrap this.
And because we don't
actually have a model object,
we just have these keys defining sort of
loosely an attribute name with a column.
We need to wrap them in
CFNumbers and CFStrings all the time.
And as you can see in the shark trace,
that starts to add up like 15% of the
time just working a little dictionary.
You can see that the dictionary
object is really convenient,
but probably not as fast
as we can possibly get.
It took about 100 lines
of code to do that.
And in this sample here,
I did some work to address the fact that,
and I'm repeating it just
to keep everything fair,
so to speak.
So this is actually a good 40% faster,
so we're fetching about 200,000 lines,
200,000 rows per second this way.
It's also using exclusively SQLite.
and we're doing some stuff
in Coconaut because we can
get some stuff for free here.
So the key performance enhancement
now is to throw out that generic
dictionary and have a real object
that we can directly assign Ivers to.
So we really cut back on all the
overhead we spent in hashing.
And all that hashing also contributed
to the retain and release overhead.
You can also see that we're spending
some serious time here hacking on
retain and release because that came
up pretty heavily in the Shark sample.
So I'll run this in Shark as well.
Okay.
So release is still taking
up a big amount of time,
but you see most of the dictionary
hashing now has gone away,
which makes sense.
It's now focused on creating
the CFString object,
strap the string values.
But in here, we get to assign the numbers
directly into our IVARs.
So that's actually a pretty
big performance improvement.
And we also cut down on some of
the message sending going on.
So in here,
where we used to be spending more time,
With the dictionary hashing,
we're now spending most of
our time creating the string
wrappers about what we expect.
We basically have a CFDictionary here
to unique the values.
So this is kind of like how you
might implement a row cache,
basically.
And we've cut back on some of
the retaining and releasing here
using these custom callbacks.
So the Core Foundation collections,
you can tweak their custom callbacks.
And I keep hitting the
middle mouse button,
excuse me.
But instead of using
the default callbacks,
which we'll call the
retain and release methods,
we're using basically static functions,
which are sort of the
Objective-C equivalent
of a non-virtual method.
We've gotten rid of the overhead
of spin locking using the OS atomic
increment and decrement operations.
And as you can see down here,
we're a good 40% faster or so.
And maybe a third more code.
and I will give you the performance data.
So here in Core Data,
basically we're doing all this for
you and we're getting there just
under 500,000 rows per second.
and here's my model.
So this is a pretty simple model,
obviously.
It's just a word.
There's not a whole lot of data there,
but it does highlight the overhead
that Core Data would have to work
with because each row has a certain
amount of overhead regardless
of how much data you put in it.
So for some of you,
this is hopefully an introduction to
the new Objective-C property syntax,
which is really actually a
very exciting addition to the
Objective-C programming language.
And it allows you to do type
safe compiler check key paths,
which is a feature I know a lot of people
have been asking for for a long time.
And Core Data is going to
generate all the support for
accessor methods on the fly.
So you don't actually have to write
any of the accessor methods to do that,
which doesn't look very exciting until
we look at the main body of the code.
Here, and we're using the new
property syntax and this method,
which is the text accessor method,
it's sort of syntactically equivalent.
to doing that.
And this method gets
generated for you on the fly.
We'll take a look at the object and
see if there's any optimizations
we can apply to do that.
And it's quite a bit faster than Tiger.
And another introduction here that
we're using now are the fast enumeration
protocol that Objective-C is using.
And this is probably the fastest way
to iterate through a Cocoa collection.
It's quite nice,
and it's also much more succinct
than in the first example
where we had to ask the array.
to get every object and stuff like that.
This is really a simple app.
We create a Core Data stack here.
We're creating a fetch request.
We're using some of the new API to
tell Core Data that we don't really
want any of the lazy initialization
that goes on with faulting,
because we're going to just touch
all the objects immediately.
And we execute the fetch request.
And if we show you in Shark,
obviously being twice as fast,
it will look quite a bit different.
First thing that you'll note is main
actually is kind of down here somewhere.
There we go.
So when we execute a
fetch request in Leopard,
and this didn't quite make the seed,
but it will be forthcoming
for the ADR members who get
Leopard seeds very soon now.
If you ask for enough data,
we're going to spawn
some background threads,
and we're going to do
some pipelining for you.
And here, we do a much better job of
load balancing across this G5,
whereas in the previous apps,
we basically left the
whole processor idle,
doing nothing.
We populate some of the row values,
we do some of the
registration and the context,
some of the fault firing,
and you can see everything's
broken up pretty neatly here
in no one particular place.
[Transcript missing]
But most of the work is going on
as we basically create wrapper
objects for-- I can't show you that.
Wow, Shark did something fun.
All right,
but most of the work is going on as
we create Cocoa Wrapper objects for
you for each of the column values.
and we'll be wrapping up and
taking questions shortly.
If we can go back over to the slides.
Yeah.
So we spent a lot of effort
optimizing stuff for you in Leopard.
Like I said,
you'll get a chance to play with this
in an upcoming seed really soon now.
But as Melissa mentioned,
the Leopard seed is already about
five times faster than Tiger GM.
You can get about 125,000,
150,000 rows per second
on a 2 gigahertz G5.
The new machines are a good
twice the speed of that.
And that's what we have.
We've done a lot of work in optimizing
a bunch of other things as well.
And I really had a lot of fun testing my
app on the quad and the lab yesterday.
So 800,000 rows per second.
I'm happy about that.
Anybody else?
So...
So some things to look forward
to is we're really committed
to fixing performance bugs,
so please follow those.
And in an upcoming seed,
you'll see our support for
Objective-C properties.
You'll get to play with
some of our pipelining,
and we're building across
four architectures now.
I don't know what else the
hardware guys will spring on us,
but we'll be participating in pretty much
all of the Leopard platform initiatives.
and for more information,
you can send an email to Derek Horn,
who's the Application Frameworks
Evangelist,
and the documentation and
all the good stuff is there.
The Core Data Programming
Guide is fantastic.
It has a section on multi-threading.
It has a section on common
performance problems.
I really recommend you
take a look at that.
Malcolm is adding new sections
in response to your feedback.